This lecture is about the most
important part of a data analysis, and you don't even need a computer to do it. The first step for any data analysis
is pretty simple, you have to think. So thinking is really important. In fact, in most data analyses, you should probably do more thinking
than doing of the data analysis. Because It will save you a lot of time and
a lot of money and a lot of frustration if you just think a
little bit beforehand about what you want to do before you start digging into
the data and digging into the details. One of the most important things about
data analysis doesn't actually have to do with the analysis itself, but it is
really important to ask a good question. So in this lecture I was going
to talk a little bit about what are the characteristics
of a good question. So there's five characteristics
that I just want to highlight about what makes for a good question. So the first characteristic is that it
has to be of interest to your audience. And now, the important part of this feature is that you have to be able to
define who your audience is going to be. So depending on who you are and
where you work and what you're doing, your audience is
going to be a different set of people. So, for example, if you're an academic
your audience might be collaborators, they might be a scientific community,
they might be your funders or the general public for your problem. If you're working at a start up
your audience might be your boss or the company leadership or investors or
maybe even potential customers. So, knowing who your audience is and
knowing what questions are relevant to them is a really important part
of asking the right question. The second important part about
a good question that hasn't already been answered already, so
this may seem a little bit obvious, but with the wealth of data out there and
literature and the availability of the Internet,
it's quite possible that someone,somewhere out there, has either at least studied
your question or maybe even answered it. So doing a simple search and looking to
see if your question has already been answered, either inside or outside your
organization, can save you a lot of time and money and allow you to ask the real
question that people want answered, opposed to one that's
already been answered. So it's helpful often to discuss your
question with experts in your area, or maybe experts in your organization who
could help you to shape your question and to ask one that actually
hasn't been answered before. The third feature of a good
question is that it's plausible. And the basic idea here, is that you
need to be able to have a reasonable explanation for how the world works, if the answer to your question is
kinda what you expect it to be. In other words, you should be able to
explain the mechanism for how things work. If you can't do this, then it's usually
a bad sign that it's not a great question. And the problem with asking a question
that's not really plausible is that it may lead you to collect some bad data. In the sense that any analysis that you
do with the data might be difficult to interpret and may not really lead to strong evidence
about anything in particular. And so and that may end up wasting
a lot of time, a lot of money for people if you've collected bad data
that question is not really plausible. So before you go out and spend
the resources to conduct an experiment and do an analysis, try to think about your
questions, think about whether you could explain how things would work if
you get the answer that you expect. If you can't do that you may need to
refine your question a little bit. The fourth feature is that the question
has to be answerable okay? This is another one that
might seem a little obvious. But the truth is there
are a lot of good questions, really interesting questions,
that are just simply not answerable. There may be many reasons why
a question can't be answered. There may be ethical reasons
where you can't collect the data. You might not have the money. They might require too many resources
to try to answer a question. And so, there's a lot of questions
that simply have to go unanswered. For example, in health research, there are
a lot of questions that we have about how the body works and how does disease occur,
but we simply cannot conduct the experiments that we might like to
conduct because you might be putting people in danger, or it might be simply
unethical to do such experiments. So think about your questions
to see whether it's even possible to answer it given the kind
of real-life situations that we are in. Now, the last feature of a good
question is very important, and it's that a good question
tends to be very specific. Now, specificity is useful because it
often leads to simpler data collection and simpler kind of experiments and
data analysis. And so the key word here is sharpness. You'd like to have a question
that's very sharp. And that way you'll know whether the data meets your expectations
about the question. So a simple example might be, you might wanna know whether a good
diet leads to better health, okay? So that's a reasonable question. People think that, you eat better,
your health will be better in general, but it's not a very specific question, so
another version of that question might be, if you eat five servings of fresh fruits
and vegetables per day, does that lead to fewer respiratory tract infections
or, you know, colds, things like that? So that's a much more specific question,
because I'm, instead of saying good diet, I'm saying five servings of fruits and
vegetables per day. And instead of saying, better health, I'm
saying fewer respiratory tract infections, which is something very
specific that we can measure. So, the important thing about
having a very specific question is that it often can lead to a well
defined intervention, okay? And by the intervention I mean
an action that you can take given the answer to any
data analysis you might do. So, if we collect the data on people
who have five servings of fruits and vegetables per day, and we collect data on how many respiratory
tract infections that they have. If the data suggests that this
question is true, that more fruits and vegetables leads to fewer respiratory
tract infections, then we already know how we might intervene in terms of modifying
people's diets and improving their health. So a very specific question will tend to
lead to a well defined intervention and that will give you, those kinds of
results will allow you change behaviors, to change actions to actually
make a difference in the world. Whereas a very vague or non-specific
question will often leave you in the same place that you started out in and without
knowing what kinds of changes to make or what kinds of behaviors to change. So just to summarize the five
features of a good question are it has to be of
interest to an audience. It has to not already been answered. It has to plausible so that you can
kind of explain how things would work if the answer to the question
met your expectation. The question itself has to
be answerable in the real world given all the constraints
that you might have on you. And finally,
a good question is very specific so that it can lead to a well defined
intervention in the world.