This lecture discusses the basic
structure of a data science project. A typical data science project will be
structured in a few different phases that I'll talk about in
separately in this lecture. So there's roughly five different
phases that we can think about in a data science project. The first phase is
the most important phase, and that's the phase where
you ask the question and you specify what is it that you're
interested in learning from data. Now, specifying the question and
kind of refining it over time is really important because it will ultimately
guide the data that you obtain and the type of analysis that you do. Part of specifying the question is also
determining the type of question that you are gonna be asking. There are roughly six types
of questions that you can ask going from kind of descriptive,
to exploratory, to inferential, to causal, to prediction,
predictive and mechanistic. And so figuring out what type
of question you're asking and what exactly the question is,
is really influential. And so you should spend a lot
of time thinking about this. Once you've kind of figured
out what your question is, but typically you'll get some data. Now, either you'll have the data or you'll
have to go out and get it somewhere or maybe someone will provide it to you,
but the data will come to you. And then the next phase will
be exploratory data analysis. So this is the second part, there are two
main goals to exploratory data analysis. The first is you wanna know if
the data that you have is suitable for answering the question that you have. Then so this will depend on a variety of
factors depending on very basic things like is there enough data, are there too
many missing values, things like that. To more fundamental ones,
like are you missing certain variables or do you need to collect more data
to get those variables, etc? The second goal of
exploratory data analysis is to start to develop
a sketch of the solution. And so if the data are appropriate for answering your question,
you can start using it to kinda sketch out what the answer might be to get
a sense of kinda what it'll look like. This can be done without any formal
modeling or any kind of the statistical testing of things like that just to get
a good picture of what it might be. The next stage, the third stage,
is formal modeling. So if you're sketch kind of works out, you've got the right data and
it seems appropriate to move on, the formal modeling phase is the way
to kind of specifically write down what questions you're asking,
what parameters you're trying to estimate. And it also provides a framework for
challenging your results. So just because you've come up with
an answer in the exploratory data analysis phase doesn't mean that it's necessarily
going to be the right answer and you need to be able to challenge
your results through a variety of approaches where the sensitivity
analysis are other types of analysis. So challenging your model and just
developing a formal framework is really important to making sure that you
can develop robust evidence for answering your question. The next phase is interpretation so
once you've done your analysis your formal modeling you wanna think about
how to interpret your results and there are a variety of things to think
about in the interpretation phase the data science project. The first is kinda like think about
how your results jive with kinda what you expected to find when you
where first asking the question. And also you wanna think about
the kind the totality of the evidence that you've developed. At this point, you've probably
done many different analysis, you probably fit in many different models. And so you have many different bits
of information to think about and part of the interpretation
phase is to kind of assemble all that information to weigh
the different pieces of evidence. So that you know what kind or which are more reliable, which are more
important than others and to get a sense of the totality of evidence with respect
to kind of answering the question. The last phase is the communication phase. Any data science project that
is successful will wanna communicate its findings
to some sort of audience. Now that audience may be internal to
your organization, it may be external, it may be to a large audience or
even just a few people. But communicating your findings is
an essential part of data science in it because it informs the data
analysis process and a it translates your findings into action. So that's the last part which is not
a formal part of a data science project necessarily, but often there will be
some decision that needs to be made or some action that needs to be taken. And the data science project will
have been conducted in support of making a decision or taking an action. So that last phase will depend on more
than just the results of the data size or the data analysis, but may require inputs from many different parts of an
organization or from other stakeholders. So ultimately if the decision is made, the data analysis that was done will
inform that decision and will support and the evidence that was collected
will support that decision. So these are roughly the five
phases of a data science project. There's the question, there's exploratory
data analysis, there's formal modeling, and there's interpretation,
and there's communication. Now, there is another
approach that can be taken, it's very often taken in
data science project. And that is to really
start with the data and to start with an exploratory
data analysis. So often there will be
a data set available, But, it won't be immediately clear kind of
what the data set will be useful for. So it can be useful to kind of do some
exploratory data analysis, to look at the data, to summarize it a little bit,
make some plots, and see what's there. And to generate some interesting
questions based on the data. So this is sometimes called hypothesis
generating because it kind of produces questions that were already there. Once you've produced
the questions that you wanna ask, based on your initial kind of
exploratory data analysis, it may be useful to kind of
get more data or other data to kind of do an exploratory data analysis
that's specific to your question now. And then continue with the formal
modeling, interpretation and communication. One thing that you have to be wary of is
to do the exploratory data analysis in one data set, develop the question, and
then go back to the same data set. And pretend like you hadn't done
the exploratory data analysis before and come at it with say a fresh question. That goes on to the rest of the stages. This could often be a recipe for
kind of, for bias in your analysis. Because the results were
derived from the same data set. So it's important to be careful about
doing that and to try to obtain other data when you're using the data to generate
the questions in the first place. So this is the secondary approach to data
science that can be very useful and can often result in many interesting questions
that are generated from the data. Data science projects have a variety
of phases and it's important to kind of understand which phase you're in so
that you know kind of how to progress and how to move forward with
any data science project.