So once you've identified the people that
you wanna bring in, or people who've applied to your organization,
the next step is interviewing them, and trying to figure out if they're a good
fit for your data science team. So the structure of a data science
interview is usually is follows. Usually you have individual or group meetings where you meet
either one on one with the person. Or you have a small group
of people meet with them. Then you have some kind of demonstration
or presentation of their skills, and then maybe a test of their
technical skills as well. So those are usually the three main
components of the data science interview. And so,
I'm gonna talk about each of these. So the first is individual meetings or
group meetings. So this kind of depends on
the size of your organization. How many people they'll meet at once,
whether it's a few people, or one person. And ideally they will meet both people
inside the data science team as well as people outside the data science team, so
you can get feedback on whether they've communicated well with both internal
people and external people. So the key here is to focus on
the projects that they've worked on. Try to illicit as much information as
you can about how they work on projects. Whether they're go-getters, whether
they can go figure it out on their own. It's also very critical that
you assess at this stage. The resume will tell you a lot
about their technical skills. It will tell very little about
their interpersonal skills. So this is sort of a critical stage
where you need to dissect and identify, are they a person that will easily work
with other people in your organisation. Ideally, you want to do this in such a way
that it's sometimes good to have people can make people a little
uncomfortable as data scientists. Again, that's gonna be part of their
job is they might come up with ideas, when they might analyze data, and come to
conclusions that aren't super popular. But you might still wanna be able
to communicate with them, and you'll be able to do
that in a friendly way. Here you're gonna want to focus on
the global evaluation of skills. So some people have used
technical recruiting questions. Although, a lot of large organizations,
including really famous data science organizations, have kind of moved
away from that in interviews, sort of the riddle type of questions. Or the mathematical type puzzle questions
are sort of not in favor any more, and I think I agree with that in the sense
that it's very unuseful in a very confined setting to know how somebody's
gonna react to a specific tricky puzzle. It's usually like, have they
studied that kind of puzzle before, is a better predictor than
their actual abilities. And so, it's better to ask sort
of general purpose questions. How would you tackle this kind of problem? How would you, in general, build out the infrastructure to
solve this kind of security risk? So you wanna focus on, maybe some drill
down into some technical details, but you definitely want to focus on
their conceptual understanding. Do they know how to tackle the problems? Do they know the right
sort of language to speak? Do they know the right
technologies to talk about? Do they seem like they have experience in
solving the sorts of problems that you'd ask them to solve if they
came onto your organization? The next key component, and some
organizations don't do this, but I think it's very important when interviewing any
data scientist, data engineer, or data science manager, is to have them do some
kind of demonstration or presentation. This is good for a couple of reasons. One, it's an ability for
them to show their own creativity and show their own sort of unique contribution
that they can bring to your organization. So if they do a presentation about
a data analysis they've done, or an infrastructure they've built, or they
demo some software that they build, or if they talk a little bit about
their management techniques and how they would manage a data science team. It's important to get sort of that
information about what's creative or unique about them. It's also a communications skills check. Almost always data scientist,
data engineers, data managers, they're going to have to present
their results to people. And so, it's good to evaluate right from
the get-go, are they able to do that, are they able to answer
questions on their feet. Are they comfortable with presenting
information that's technical and detailed. It's also an opportunity for
a broader group to interact with them. So you can only have so many individual or small group meetings with
any person at any given day. But if you have a nice big presentation
for them to give with a larger group of people, it gives more people
a chance to sort of weigh in on. Does this person seem like the kind
of person that would fit into our organization? So finally, there's often
an evaluation of technical skills. Now, there are two kind of
schools of thought here. One is very technical,
maybe even like riddle-like problems. And the other is to actually have them try
to solve a very small but real problem. So I think that the latter case
is usually much more effective. So for a data scientist, you might
give them a very small data set, and see if they can do an analysis on it and
report. It might take them only an hour, cuz
it's very small, or something like that. And then, you afterwards
have an interview with them. You go through what they did, and get a feel for what their
thinking process is really like. Ideally, you'd give them a problem or a project that's related to what
your organization does every day. It might be a simulated example or
a fake example, so they don't get access to any real data,
but it gives you an idea. How are they gonna operate
day-to-day in the organization? So those are the three components,
you have individual or group meetings. You have a demonstration or
presentation of their skills, and then you have some evaluation
of their technical skills. Then you collect all the information
from everybody who saw them, and you make a judgment on whether they're
a right fit for your organization. [BLANK AUDIO]