No matter how well you've put
the data science team together, there can often be problems when the data
science team is interacting with people outside of the team but
within your organization. So, this lecture's a little bit
about what those problems are and how to deal with them. So, the first one is lack of interaction. So, this can happen if you, especially if you have a data science
team that's stand alone, it's on its own. And there's not necessarily a standing,
or regular commitment, to be embedded it with, or
sitting with an external unit. So, here if there's a lack of interaction,
you have to identify what the problem is. The problem can either be
with the data scientists. They don't know how to contact the person. They don't know what
questions to be asking or it could be with the external unit. So, sometimes that lack of communication
is because there is nothing to do. So, if there's no communication,
you need to identity, is this because there's not actually
a problem for them to be solving. In which case it's good to repurpose
that data scientist's time on to a different project. Or to identify, is it because the external
person isn't necessarily sending over, hey, we need to have those
projections by the end of the week. They're just not contacting
the data scientists. Or is it because your data scientist is so
busy working on their problem, that they're not interacting. They're not emailing and contacting
the person that they're working with. So again, this will depend a little
bit on the scale of the project. If you're building a quick
machine learning algorithm, there should be lots of quick interaction. If you're building out a huge
scalable infrastructure for data management, it might take
a little bit longer before there's interaction with the leadership team
about that, and that's to be expected. So if there's this lack of communication,
there's a couple of options. You can take a more active role. You can start initiating the conversation, you can send emails that will
connect people together. Again, you have to be very mindful of
the balance of not interrupting time for data scientists and data engineers. Those sort of uninterrupted moments
are when most of the work gets done. And again, if you need to move personnel
from a project, whether it's for lack of motivation,
lack of good communication, or because there's not really a data science
project they're gonna be working on, that's an important part of a data
science manager, or an executive's job. Another reason that you might have to
get involved is lack of empowerment. So this often happens if the data
scientist is actually embedded in an external team. And so, if that happens, often the data
scientist will feel a little bit isolated and they might not feel
empowered to make decisions. So the external unit is in charge. They have to make some
decisions about marketing. Or they have to make some decisions about
how they're gonna take that data and make a decision for a product or so forth. And since they don't necessarily
make those decisions, they might feel like I keep
presenting my data ideas, I keep showing them experimental results,
and they just don't listen. They don't wanna answer to those data, they don't wanna sort of use
the information that I'm presenting. So the first thing that you need
to do is understand both sides, cuz that can happen in one of two ways. One, the person that they're working with,
the collaborator they're working with, can just be ignoring their advice,
can be ignoring their data analysis. In which case, it's up to you to
convince the other person, and to sort of take the initiative to explain why
this is important, why using the data will help you do a better experiment, will get
you better results at the end of the day. On the other hand, it could be because
the data scientist is just sort of pushing ideas beyond
the scope of the data, or they're not getting the data analysis
done in a way that's convincing for the external person to sort of look at and
interact with. So you kind of have to
understand both sides. And then, it's sort of up to the data
science manager to take the heat, particularly in a situation where say,
leadership is asking for this machine learning algorithm to be done last week,
and your data scientist is telling you, well, it takes six weeks to build
a machine learning algorithm to do this. Then, it's up to the data science
manager to collect that information, present it, and take the heat if things aren't going the
way that everybody hoped they will take. So, one thing that's sort of a common
misconception about data science or data engineering is that it's
basically instantaneous. Because computers are so fast,
people think that also data science or machine learning is
really fast to develop. But sometimes it isn't. Sometimes it takes a long time to build
a really good machine learning algorithm. And so, part of your role is
sort of being the intermediate. Being the explainer. Why does it take so long? And then providing internal
support to your data science team. And whether that's just being an ear for
them to talk to. Whether it's by suggesting new ideas. And very often it's by
identifying when to stop. So data science, data engineering and data science are often areas where
perfect is the enemy of the very good. Once you have a pretty good solution, that
might be enough to get everything done. And so, the data scientists or
data engineer, because they have pride in what
they're doing, will sort of try to optimize that machine learning
algorithm for the last 3% accuracy, or save at just a little bit more computing
power on the data engineering side. Sometimes that's necessary,
but sometimes it isn't, and it's up to the data science manager
to sort of pay attention and manage when you're actually solving the
data science problem that matters versus when you're chasing something that
doesn't maybe necessarily matter. The last problem can be
lack of understanding. So, this could be because
the data science team doesn't understand the problem
that they're working on. This commonly happens when data
scientist act in a consulting roll, when they just one off, see people from
your organization, or bring one question, how does this t test work, or
how does this random force work. Then, they might not actually
understand the problem, and so they might give advice
that isn't very good. Another way that this could work is,
the marketing team doesn't understand what data science can do, or the product team
doesn't understand what data science can do, or any collaborator doesn't
understand what data science can do. And so it's up to you to sort of help make
sure that everyone knows what's possible, what's not possible. And then, you can do this, you can manage this process in
a couple of different ways. One, make sure that, if you have
a separate dedicated data science team, that they interact with other groups in
a regular way, that they're embedded for periods of time. Also, that there's presentations
regularly to the organization both about capabilities and about new
techniques and about just what's going on. And then advertising the data to
the science team within the organization. Make sure that everyone knows, oh, that's
a problem that the data science team can handle or actually we don't have any data
on that but it'd be cool to collect it. Is that something that we
actually need to collect data on? Those are the sorts of roles that can
help build a understanding within the organization about what data
science is and how it can help. So those are a couple of the ways that
you could help minimize sort of external conflicts within the data science team.